VEP-183: NetworkDevicesWithDRA API design (#185)
kubevirt/enhancements: veps/sig-network/183-dra-network/vep.md

## Use Cases

### Supported Use Cases

1. SR-IOV network devices where the DRA driver publishes required attributes in device metadata files:
   - `resources.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` for SR-IOV VF passthrough

### Future Use Cases
1. Scalable Functions network devices
2. Live migration of VMIs using DRA network devices (will have a VEP amendment)

## Repos

kubevirt/kubevirt

## Design

This design introduces a new feature gate: `NetworkDevicesWithDRA`. 
All the API changes will be gated behind this feature gate so as not to break existing functionality.

### API Changes

A new network source type `ResourceClaimNetworkSource` is added to the existing `NetworkSource` type:

```go
// Represents the source resource that will be connected to the vm.
// Only one of its members may be specified.
type NetworkSource struct {
	Pod           *PodNetwork                 `json:"pod,omitempty"`
	Multus        *MultusNetwork              `json:"multus,omitempty"`
	ResourceClaim *ResourceClaimNetworkSource `json:"resourceClaim,omitempty"`
}

// ResourceClaimNetworkSource represents a network resource requested
// via a Kubernetes ResourceClaim.

> type ResourceClaimNetworkSource struct {

Reviewer: Any resource why ClaimRequest cannot be used here? https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/main/staging/src/kubevirt.io/api/core/v1/schema.go#L635

Author: Yes, because for Network DRA, `requestName` must exists, as was discussed in the meeting,
however for GPU and HostDevices it isn't.
Yet there is a bug there
https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/16319#issuecomment-3664541893
Once i reach it i will open an issue (with  better explanation) about it so we can discuss and fix it

Author: created issue for this 
https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/issues/16771

Reviewer 2: I don't think this thread has reached a conclusion yet.

Since https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/16556, both `ClaimName` and `RequestName`  [1] are required for GPUs and HostDevices, so it seems like the optionality difference that motivated a separate type no longer exists.

VEP #10 defines `ClaimRequest` as shared infrastructure for NetworkDevicesWithDRA[2].

@alaypatel07 @oshoval Could `ClaimRequest` be updated to make both fields required and reused here?
The beta graduation [3] could be a good opportunity.

cc @EdDev @iholder101 @vladikr 

[1] https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/d872de498903e045785a6ed3179fb4ca784f73ad/staging/src/kubevirt.io/api/core/v1/schema.go#L710-L719
[2] https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/10-dra-devices/vep.md?plain=1#L141-L143
[3] https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/292

Author: It was correct back then, but since this discussion, it was changed indeed.
 
As long as GPU / HostDevice don't have a plan to support more than 1 interface, it is doable i believe,
but lets please do it as follow-up wrt this VEP

Author: created https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17611
it adapts the `ClaimRequest` to have the two fields non optional, with scheme validation, and string instead *string (as Orel also agreed it makes more sense)

if we take this direction, will able to consume it smoothest
and then VEP will be changed to

```
### API Changes

A new network source field `resourceClaim` is added to `NetworkSource`.
The field reuses the existing core `ClaimRequest` type (already used by GPUs and HostDevices):

// Represents the source resource that will be connected to the VM.
// Only one of its members may be specified.
type NetworkSource struct {
	Pod           *PodNetwork                 `json:"pod,omitempty"`
	Multus        *MultusNetwork              `json:"multus,omitempty"`
	ResourceClaim *ClaimRequest               `json:"resourceClaim,omitempty"`
}
```

Author: i think that regardless if we take https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17611, this way or another,
we can just reuse `ClaimRequest`, and validate the expected fields are presented,
this is already done by GPU / HostDevice, and is required to stay like that, for all DRA device types, including the ones we added in this VEP,
because the fields should stay `omitempty` in order to support the HostDevice with `DeviceName` instead DRA

this way we will unblock this VEP, and untangle it from this discussion that can continue in the mentioned PR in parallel

wdyt @orelmisan , all ?

Note:
i still think that https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17611 is good to have

Author: pushed change to reuse `ClaimRequest`

> 	// ClaimName references the name of a ResourceClaim in the

Author: Because `spec.resourceClaims[]` is the one that already exists for all DRA types,
and in this struct `ResourceClaimNetworkSource` we have claim + request,
so there can be multiple `ResourceClaimNetworkSource` with different request, but that point to the same `spec.resourceClaims[]` entry

Btw this also has a bug, that i will open an issue about
@SchSeba found that we generally speaking we don't render the pod correct in some more
advanced cases
here is more info, it is out of the scope of this VEP
https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/16258/changes/164297cfcfdd8908f928e58e9c8cca2530a4daa3
I will open an issue about it

> 	// ClaimName references the name of a ResourceClaim in the

Author: updated the comment

I already worked / fixed the bug, so i will self assign once i open it, thanks

> 	// ClaimName references the name of a ResourceClaim in the

Author: Updated the comment

Created here, self assigned because already have a WIP [direction](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/commit/164297cfcfdd8908f928e58e9c8cca2530a4daa3)
https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/issues/16769

	// VMI's namespace that provides the network resource.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	ClaimName string `json:"claimName"`

	// RequestName specifies which request from the
	// ResourceClaim.spec.devices.requests array this network
	// source corresponds to.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	RequestName string `json:"requestName"`
}
```

The VMI must also include the resource claim in `spec.resourceClaims[]` (consistent with GPU and HostDevice DRA usage).

### Status Reporting

> For consistency with GPUs and HostDevices, DRA-provisioned network devices populate the same `vmi.status.deviceStatus.hostDeviceStatuses[]` array. The DRA controller in virt-controller:

Author: do you mean https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/185#discussion_r2728267302 ?
if so same answer imho

1. Identifies networks with `resourceClaim` source type
2. Extracts device information from the allocated ResourceClaim and ResourceSlice
3. Populates `hostDeviceStatuses` with network name and allocated device attributes (PCI address)

The status entry name matches the network name from `spec.networks[].name`, allowing virt-launcher to correlate the network configuration with its allocated DRA device.

The detailed mechanism for extracting device information from Pod status, ResourceClaim, and ResourceSlice follows the same approach described in VEP #10.

### SR-IOV Integration

When a network interface has `sriov` binding and references a network with `resourceClaim` source:

1. The network admitter validates that exactly one network source type (pod, multus, or resourceClaim) is specified

> 2. Virt-controller adds the resource claim to the virt-launcher pod spec via `WithNetworksDRA()` render option

Author: prefix says what it does `Virt-controller adds the resource claim to the virt-launcher pod spec` 
i can just remove func mentioning if you prefer, i dont think we need more details than the prefix

> 2. Virt-controller adds the resource claim to the virt-launcher pod spec via `WithNetworksDRA()` render option

Reviewer 2: I also prefer that implementation details would be dropped.

> 2. Virt-controller adds the resource claim to the virt-launcher pod spec via `WithNetworksDRA()` render option

Author: will drop

> 3. The DRA controller populates `vmi.status.deviceStatus` with the PCI address from the ResourceSlice

Author: The DRA controller (#10)  populates the data from the ResourceClaim to `vmi.status.deviceStatus` already
so we just need to read it,
we show flow here, not addition by this VEP

3. The DRA controller populates device status with the PCI address from the ResourceSlice
4. Virt-launcher's SR-IOV implementation (`CreateDRAHostDevices()`) reads the PCI address from device status and generates the appropriate libvirt hostdev XML, identical to traditional Multus-based SR-IOV

This approach provides clean separation: DRA handles device provisioning, KubeVirt networks API handles configuration.

**Important:** Traditional Multus-based SR-IOV (using `multus` network source) and DRA-based SR-IOV (using `resourceClaim` network source) are **mutually exclusive per VM**. A single VMI should not mix both approaches. The existing Multus-based SR-IOV API remains fully supported and unchanged.

### Custom MAC Address Support

To support custom MAC addresses for DRA-based SR-IOV networks, KubeVirt annotates the virt-launcher pod with requested MAC addresses. The MAC address is taken from the existing `spec.domain.devices.interfaces[].macAddress` field:

```

> kubevirt.io/dra-networks: '[{"claimName":"sriov","requestName":"vf","mac":"de:ad:00:00:be:ef"}]'

Author: Assuming you mean that K8s will create a RessourceClaim if `ResourceClaimTemplate` is embedded in the pod right ?
This is a precondition for this idea.

But i think that we need to consider all the cases
1. Exisitng ResourceClaim 
2. Existing ResourceClaimTemplate
3. Kubevirt "auto" mode where Kubevirt is the one that creates the ResourceClaim

And to also consider that lets say `ResourceClaimTemplate` exists, we copy it to the pod, add there the MAC,
but now upon migration, we need to copy the pod's `ResourceClaimTemplate` because the original might be changed and we can't depend on it.
While this is a nice idea, given the above, we should start simple imho, and later consider to adjusts according needs.
Moreover i think that it is embedding a whole CRD instead an annotation, and have cons as above.
We can make the annotation standard and it is pretty straight forward and simpler.

Note, didn't think deeper on the other cases, took one edge example to show why it makes things harder.

This preserves the structure of `k8s.v1.cni.cncf.io/networks`, but for claimName/requestName instead of NAD.

The SR-IOV DRA driver reads this annotation and passes the claim/request identifier along with the MAC address to the SR-IOV CNI, ensuring the network interface is configured with the specified MAC address.

**Design Rationale:** The annotation-based approach was chosen because it solves the case where ResourceClaim/ResourceClaimTemplate is created by the admin (not by KubeVirt). Since this approach handles the more complex admin-created claim scenario, it naturally also works for the general case where KubeVirt creates the claims ("auto" mode), providing a unified solution for both scenarios.

### Validation

Webhook validations ensure:
1. Networks with `resourceClaim` source have corresponding `sriov` binding interfaces

> 2. Each network must reference a unique `claimName` + `requestName` combination. No two DRA entities (networks, hostDevices, or GPUs) can share the same tuple, as each interface+network pair must map to exactly one device allocation

Author: For now will enforce it just for network versus network, not cross GPU / HostDevice.
If needed also cross better in a separated PR.

EDIT - done as part of https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17490
once it is merged we can extend it also for network DRA (have commit ready for that)

2. Each network must reference a unique `claimName` + `requestName` combination. No two DRA entities (networks, hostDevices, or GPUs) can share the same tuple, as each interface+network pair must map to exactly one device allocation
3. No mixing of Multus-based and DRA-based SR-IOV in the same VMI.

### Component Changes

**Virt-Controller:**
- Renders virt-launcher pod spec with resource claims from `vmi.spec.resourceClaims[]` referenced by `vmi.spec.networks[].resourceClaim`

> - Annotates virt-launcher pod with `kubevirt.io/dra-networks` containing MAC addresses from `spec.domain.devices.interfaces[].macAddress`

Reviewer: Is the intention here to use this annotation until downward API is available for use? or will this annotation be maintained long term?

  - Filtering VMI spec interfaces with SRIOV binding that reference networks with resourceClaim source
  - Looking up the corresponding VMI status device status entry by network name
  - Extracting the PCI address from VMI status device status attributes
  - Generating standard libvirt hostdev XML

- **Note:** If the ResourceClaim/ResourceClaimTemplate is allocating more than one device for the request, KubeVirt will consume the first device from the allocated devices

## API Examples

### VMI with DRA SR-IOV Network

```yaml
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: DeviceClass
metadata:
  name: sriov.network.example.com
spec:
  selectors:
  - cel:
      expression: device.driver == 'sriov.network.example.com'
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: sriov-network-claim-template
  namespace: default
spec:
  spec:
    devices:
      requests:
      - name: sriov-nic-request
        exactly:
          deviceClassName: sriov.network.example.com
---
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  name: vmi-sriov-dra
  namespace: default
spec:
  domain:
    devices:

>       interfaces:

Reviewer 3: I recommend to add one more sriov interface in order to demonstrate what gets multiplied(ifaces, networks, resourceClaims?) and what remains sigular (deviceClass, resourceClaimTemplate)

Author: well we dont support it correct yet because of https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/issues/16769
so i prefer not, once we do i will amend it

Author: working here on a fix https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17490
it also hardens the webhook for cross device type duplication checks
with those 2 changes, adding network DRA will allow to follow same practices and also have multiple devices,

Once it is merged will add it to the VEP, but lets not block please the VEP about it, 
since as discussed with @EdDev, we propose here incremental PRs, since it is alpha, so we will meet the timelines.
Nevertheless DRA is my top priority now, so whatever i can advance i am on it

> # VEP #183: SR-IOV Network DRA Support
> 
> ## Release Signoff Checklist
> 
> Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.
> 
> - [x] (R) Enhancement issue created, which links to VEP dir in [kubevirt/enhancements] (not the initial VEP PR)

Reviewer 2: The VEP template was recently updated in #212. Could you please adjust the document to align with the latest version?
```suggestion
## VEP Status Metadata

### Target releases

<!--
A PR must update this section during the planning phase of a given release in order to track it.
PRs that will not update the VEP during the planning phase will not be able to graduate the
VEP by creating a code PR to kubevirt/kubevirt to bump the phase in-code.

Please avoid targeting future releases in this section. Only capture the upcoming release.
For example, during the planning phase for version v1.123, do **not** target beta for v.124 in advance.
-->

- This VEP targets alpha for version: 
- This VEP targets beta for version:
- This VEP targets GA for version:

### Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue created, which links to VEP dir in [kubevirt/enhancements] (not the initial VEP PR)
- [ ] (R) Alpha target version is explicitly mentioned and approved
- [ ] (R) Beta target version is explicitly mentioned and approved
- [ ] (R) GA target version is explicitly mentioned and approved
```

## Overview

> This proposal adds support for DRA (Dynamic Resource Allocation) provisioned SR-IOV network devices in KubeVirt.

Reviewer 2: Please consider adding a link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/.

It extends the existing KubeVirt networks API with a new `ResourceClaimNetworkSource` type, allowing SR-IOV NICs to be allocated via DRA while maintaining compatibility with the existing Multus-based SR-IOV approach.

This VEP builds upon the core DRA infrastructure defined in VEP #10 ([kubevirt/enhancements/pull/11](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/11)) to add support for network devices, specifically SR-IOV NICs.

> ## Motivation

Reviewer 2: The motivation currently focuses on the vendor perspective. Could we also mention what advantages DRA brings for users/admins compared to the current device-plugin + Multus flow?

DRA adoption for network devices is important for KubeVirt so that network device vendors can expect
the same level of control when using Virtual Machines as they have with Containers.
DRA allows network device vendors fine-grained control over device allocation and topology.

## Goals

- Introduce the API changes needed to consume DRA-enabled SR-IOV network devices in KubeVirt
- Integrate KubeVirt SR-IOV networking with externally supplied DRA drivers

> - Seamlessly support DRA-based SR-IOV use cases available to containers in KubeVirt VMIs

Reviewer 2: The first three goals overlap quite a bit. Would something like this work? 
```suggestion
- Enable KubeVirt VMs to consume SR-IOV network devices via DRA, using externally supplied DRA drivers
```

- Support custom MAC addresses for DRA-based SR-IOV networks (phased in after Alpha1)

## Non Goals

- Replace existing Multus-based SR-IOV network integration (remains fully supported)

> - Deploy/manage the DRA SR-IOV driver (provided externally, e.g. by sriov-network-operator)

Reviewer 2: Consider removing the specific mention of `sriov-network-operator`, since it's only one possible implementation and keeping it generic avoids implying a preference.

> - Support coexistence of DRA SR-IOV and device-plugin SR-IOV

Reviewer 2: Could you please clarify whether this non-goal refers to coexistence within a single VM or across the cluster? The Design section mentions they are mutually exclusive per VM, if per-cluster coexistence is supported, it might be worth making that distinction explicit here.

Author: for now cluster-wide, later VM scoped (adding this line, and updating the design section)
the reason is we don't have a way yet to deploy both at the same time, since they need to respect each other, and not fight over the devices,
Sebastian said he is looking on a method, which will be part of the `sriov-network-operator` scope (at least on downstream)

- Live migration of VMs with DRA network devices in Alpha (targeted for Beta)

## Definition of Users

> - **User**: A person who wants to attach SR-IOV network devices to a VM

Reviewer 2: We usually use "VM owner" for this one.

- **Admin**: A person who manages infrastructure and configures DRA device classes and drivers

> - **Developer**: A person familiar with CNCF ecosystem who develops automation using these APIs

Reviewer 2: Could you please elaborate on why the developer persona is needed here? The user and admin personas seem to cover the relevant use cases.  I'm not sure what the developer story adds beyond "the API can be consumed programmatically".

Author: dropping

## User Stories

> - As a user, I want to consume SR-IOV network devices via DRA in my VMs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- As a VM owner, I want to attach SR-IOV network devices to my VM using a `ResourceClaim`, so that I can consume DRA-managed devices the same way I would in a container workload.
```

> - As a user, I want to specify custom MAC addresses for DRA-provisioned SR-IOV interfaces

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- As a VM owner, I want to set a custom MAC address on a DRA-provisioned SR-IOV interface, so that I can maintain consistent network identity
```

> - As an admin, I want to use DRA drivers to manage SR-IOV device allocation with fine-grained control

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- As an admin, I want to control SR-IOV device allocation through DRA API, so that I can define allocation policies without modifying KubeVirt configuration.
```

- As a developer, I want extensible APIs to build automation for DRA-based networking

## Use Cases

### Supported Use Cases

1. SR-IOV network devices where the DRA driver publishes required attributes in device metadata files:

>    - `resources.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` for SR-IOV VF passthrough

Reviewer 2: I don't follow this requirement, could you please elaborate?

Author: * The SR-IOV DRA driver exposes device metadata ([KEP-5304](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5304)), including the PCI address via the `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` attribute.
* Kubelet writes this downward API file, which includes the fields the driver reported to it.
`./run/kubernetes.io/dra-device-attributes/resourceclaims/<claimName>/<requestName>/<driverName>-metadata.json`
* KubeVirt consumes that value and uses it for libvirt host-device passthrough.

This is not a semantic change in the value KubeVirt needs: the same PCI address value is already used today via the existing (legacy) downward-API based mechanism for the same passthrough purpose.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the explanation. Could we convert this to a non-goal instead? Something like:
> Support integration with DRA drivers that do not publish resources.kubernetes.io/pciBusID via the DRA metadata/Downward API flow (KEP-5304).

That way the driver requirements are stated as a clear boundary rather than as a use case.

Author: aint non goal usually means non goal for this release but usually goal for the future ?
asking because it is a pure limitation always indeed, i am not sure it fits on non goal section

maybe just to merge it with the external External Dependencies section ?
since it is indeed driver related dependency
(we can even drop it, because the external dep already says downward API is required, and this is one of the fields that are needed to be included there)

Author: Dropped as discussed offline

### Future Use Cases
1. Scalable Functions network devices

> 2. Live migration of VMIs using DRA network devices (targeted for Beta via Downward API metadata files)

Reviewer 2: Can we move these to the implementation phases bellow?

# VEP #183: SR-IOV Network DRA Support

## VEP Status Metadata

### Target releases

- This VEP targets alpha for version: v1.9

### Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [x] (R) Enhancement issue created, which links to VEP dir in [kubevirt/enhancements] (not the initial VEP PR)
- [x] (R) Alpha target version is explicitly mentioned and approved

## Overview

This proposal adds support for [DRA (Dynamic Resource Allocation)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/) provisioned SR-IOV network devices in KubeVirt.

> It extends the existing KubeVirt networks API with a new `ResourceClaimNetworkSource` type, allowing SR-IOV NICs to be allocated via DRA while maintaining compatibility with the existing Multus-based SR-IOV approach.

Reviewer 2: Could we clarify what "maintaining compatibility" means here? The non-goals section says DRA and device-plugin SR-IOV can't coexist in the same cluster, so this might be clearer as something like "without removing the existing Multus-based SR-IOV approach" or "while the existing Multus-based SR-IOV approach remains supported separately".

Author: amended

- **Scheduler-aware allocation flow:** Allocation is part of a Kubernetes-native claim flow before workload finalization, so placement decisions can account for device constraints earlier.
- **Standard, built-in Kubernetes API model:** DRA uses first-class Kubernetes APIs (`ResourceClaim`, `ResourceClaimTemplate`, `DeviceClass`) instead of plugin-specific side channels, improving portability, auditability, and ongoing operations.
- **Structured metadata path in KubeVirt:** KubeVirt consumes allocated device attributes from the DRA metadata/downward-API path (aligned with VEP #10), which is more robust and extensible than relying on ad-hoc per-plugin conventions.

## Goals

- Enable KubeVirt VMs to consume SR-IOV network devices via DRA, using externally supplied DRA drivers
- Support custom MAC addresses for DRA-based SR-IOV networks (phased in after Alpha1)

## Non Goals

- Replace existing Multus-based SR-IOV network integration (remains fully supported)
- Deploy/manage the DRA SR-IOV driver (provided externally)

> - Support coexistence of DRA SR-IOV and device-plugin SR-IOV (cluster-wide)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Support coexistence of DRA SR-IOV and device-plugin SR-IOV in the same cluster
```

- Live migration of VMs with DRA network devices in Alpha (targeted for Beta)

## Definition of Users

> - **"VM owner**: A person who wants to attach SR-IOV network devices to a VM

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
- **VM owner**: A person who wants to attach SR-IOV network devices to a VM
```

- **Admin**: A person who manages infrastructure and configures DRA device classes and drivers

## User Stories

> - As a VM owner, I want to attach SR-IOV network devices to my VM using a `ResourceClaim` or `ResourceClaimTemplate`, 

Reviewer 2: Per my understanding, tying a network to a `ResourceClaim` has a structural implication for live migration: even though multiple pods can reference the same ResourceClaim, the allocation itself is pinned to a specific node via AllocationResult.NodeSelector [1], so the target pod on a different node couldn't use the same allocation.
Although migration is intended for Beta, could you please share how this constraint is expected to be addressed?

[1] https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/4381-dra-structured-parameters/README.md#allocation-result
[2] https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/assign-resources/allocate-devices-dra/#claim-resources

Author: Once you create a `ResourceClaimTemplate`, k8s creates a new ResourceClaim per pod,
so `AllocationResult` will be different,
Same will happen on the future planned mode, where Kubevirt is the one that will create the ResourceClaims ("auto" mode, i understood about it from Edy)

I even tried it already with migration, and this wasn't a problem, when used ResourceClaimTemplate.
didn't try with ResourceClaim, but prefer to focus on non migration, 
We might indeed find out that ResourceClaimTemplate must be used, but i don't know yet
(i did check that regular VM without migration works with ResourceClaim)

Reviewer 2: > Once you create a ResourceClaimTemplate, k8s creates a new ResourceClaim per pod,
so AllocationResult will be different,

My question was about `ResourceClaim` which is one of the proposed API options.

> Same will happen on the future planned mode, where Kubevirt is the one that will create the ResourceClaims ("auto" mode, i understood about it from Edy)

Is it referenced by this document?

> I even tried it already with migration, and this wasn't a problem, when used ResourceClaimTemplate.
didn't try with ResourceClaim, but prefer to focus on non migration,
We might indeed find out that ResourceClaimTemplate must be used, but i don't know yet
(i did check that regular VM without migration works with ResourceClaim)

The reason I'm asking is because this VEP introduces the API.

Author: > > Once you create a ResourceClaimTemplate, k8s creates a new ResourceClaim per pod,
> > so AllocationResult will be different,
> 
> My question was about `ResourceClaim` which is one of the proposed API options.

`spec.resourceClaims` already exists, fwiw, we just ref it.
This is alpha, without migration,
If ResourceClaim will be bound indeed for a node after consumed, then you are right, and migration won't able to use it (sounds that you are right)
RCT will be required, and works in this aspect, i validated that quick and dirty, 

> 
> > Same will happen on the future planned mode, where Kubevirt is the one that will create the ResourceClaims ("auto" mode, i understood about it from Edy)
> 
> Is it referenced by this document?

"auto" mode is not even merged yet, as far as i know (but maybe stuff changed lately)
i just added it for completeness.
it is mentioned here
https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/185/files#diff-66cd892b8c176d83ce78f8ca6838b667b4f2f52e5bec1fc9b006caf346ec96f4R172

Author: consulted with AI, it agrees about the above 

`ResourceClaimTemplate` is the migration-friendly path (per-pod claims, separate allocations).
Direct `ResourceClaim` should be treated as non-migratable (or explicitly blocked for migration scenarios). Hence also "auto" mode if any.

There is no merged / open VEP that introduce yet the "auto" mode,
as far as i understand, it appeared on some discussion document
so the fact we mention it here is just a bonus imho, it wasn't even agreed yet upon,
and it will just have the same verdict as RC for migration anyhow,
hence we don't need to pay attention to it too much,
yet we took it into account while thinking for example about the MAC annotation, such that it will solve all the cases in one common method.

maybe @alaypatel07 @SchSeba @EdDev 
knows better about where the proposed feature, about Kubevirt as the one that creates ResourceClaims, is

anyhow, it is a legit limitation for migration, and migration is beta only

so that I can consume DRA-managed devices the same way I would in a container workload
- As a VM owner, I want to set a custom MAC address on a DRA-provisioned SR-IOV interface so that I can maintain a consistent network identity.
- As an admin, I want to control SR-IOV device allocation through the DRA APIs so that I can define allocation policies without modifying KubeVirt configuration.

## Use Cases

### Supported Use Cases

1. SR-IOV network devices where the DRA driver publishes required attributes in device metadata files:
   - `resources.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` for SR-IOV VF passthrough

## Repos

kubevirt/kubevirt

## Design

This design introduces a new feature gate: `NetworkDevicesWithDRA`.
All the API changes will be gated behind this feature gate so as not to break existing functionality.

### End-to-End Flow

#### Admin flow (one-time setup)

1. Enable and configure the SR-IOV DRA environment in the cluster:
   - Deploy/configure the external SR-IOV DRA driver (includes the SR-IOV CNI).

>    - Enable the KubeVirt `NetworkDevicesWithDRA` feature gate.

Reviewer 2: This step seems unrelated to the SR-IOV DRA deployment. Consider converting it to a stand-alone step.

2. Ensure a `DeviceClass` exists that selects SR-IOV devices managed by the SR-IOV DRA driver (typically provisioned as part of the driver setup).

> 3. Create the relevant SR-IOV `NetworkAttachmentDefinition` objects (NADs).

Reviewer 2: Is creating NADs a requirement of this VEP or an implementation detail of the SR-IOV DRA driver? The KubeVirt API changes don't reference NADs - they only deal with ResourceClaim/ResourceClaimTemplate. If NADs are needed by the driver internally, this might belong under "driver/operator deployment" in the responsibility boundary rather than as a separate admin step.

Author: The ResourceClaimTemplate / ResourceClaim ref a NAD.
The admin need to create the NAD as the setup, imho it should stay here, its a pure setup step, as was before with device plugin.
Its indeed not part of the Kubevirt API.

Please see the manifest example in the VEP, it includes the NAD ref

given the above please suggest what you prefer

> 4. Create claim objects users will consume: one or more `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects (or `ResourceClaim` objects) with device requests that reference the SR-IOV `DeviceClass` via `deviceClassName`, and align those claims with the relevant SR-IOV NAD-backed network configuration.

Reviewer 2: If NADs are a driver detail, could this be simplified to just describe the claim/device-class relationship without mentioning NADs?

Author: please see https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/185#discussion_r3106837057
i think NAD is needed for completeness of the setup

anyhow please suggest what you prefer given the info

> 4. Create claim objects users will consume: one or more `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects (or `ResourceClaim` objects) with device requests that reference the SR-IOV `DeviceClass` via `deviceClassName`, and align those claims with the relevant SR-IOV NAD-backed network configuration.

Reviewer 2: Are admins expected to create these per namespace?

Author: ResourceClaimTemplate/ResourceClaim are namespaced resources, so they are expected to be created in each namespace that will run VMs consuming them.

DeviceClass is cluster-scoped (typically created once by admin/driver setup).

> Note: a future KubeVirt enhancement may allow auto-creation of `ResourceClaim` objects when none are supplied.

Reviewer 2: Could you please elaborate when and why this is required?

Author: I understood it from Edy, that there is plan that Kubevirt will know to manage to lifecycle of ResourceClaims (in some cases).

In complex cases, where you need to create a bundle of devices, such as GPU and HostDevice that share same Numa, admin will create ResourceClaimTemplate, (current state).
But in simpler cases, where you just need a simple device, you will able to not mention the RC /RCT, nor to require admin to create them, and then Kubevirt will create them for you.

I can drop it if it adds confusion, as it is just planned as far i understand,
added it for completness

Btw maybe for migration we will need the manual RCT, in case your [concern](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/185#discussion_r3106699461) is valid.
In such case, we would recommend to not use "auto" mode when migration is desired / block it etc.

2. Reference the claim and request via `network.resourceClaim.claimName` and `network.resourceClaim.requestName`.
3. Add a matching entry in `vmi.spec.resourceClaims[]` for `network.resourceClaim.claimName` (using either an admin-provided `ResourceClaim` or a `ResourceClaimTemplate`).
4. Optionally set `spec.domain.devices.interfaces[].macAddress` for custom MAC assignment.
5. Create the VMI.

#### Responsibility boundary

- **Admin owns:**
  - driver/operator deployment
  - `DeviceClass` definitions
  - NAD definitions
  - provisioning/policy of `ResourceClaim`/`ResourceClaimTemplate` objects
- **User owns:**
  - VMI interface/network wiring
  - selecting claim/request references from provisioned `ResourceClaim`/`ResourceClaimTemplate` objects
  - optional MAC requests

### External Dependencies

- The SR-IOV DRA driver is external to KubeVirt and is not delivered by this VEP.
- Provider and environment enablement for end-to-end execution is handled outside KubeVirt core and phased separately from Alpha1 core deliverables.
- Driver capability requirement: the SR-IOV DRA driver must consume the `kubevirt.io/dra-networks` MAC annotation.

> - Driver capability requirement: the SR-IOV DRA driver must support publishing/consuming device attributes through the Kubernetes DRA metadata/Downward API flow (see [kubernetes/enhancements#5304](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5304)).

Reviewer 2: These sounds like non-goals. Can we move them to the non-goals section?

Author: its a dependency,
the driver must comply with downward API, its not a non goal, nor a goal
This is also what Sebastian and Edy suggested as far as i understand

we can sync offline if desired, it will be easier

>     > **Note:** This capability is Alpha in Kubernetes v1.36 and requires Kubernetes >= v1.36 (see [kubernetes/enhancements#5304](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5304)).

Reviewer: This note is incorrect, technically for KEP-5304, a driver with 1.36 kubeletplugin is required, the actual cluster version can be any GA'ed DRA kubernetes (1.34+)

Author: i dont understand how we will use 1.34 if it doesn't have downward API, where kubevirt requires downward API

we don't support Kubevirt network DRA prior to 1.36, agree ?
this is the scope that is limited, as a bundle

Reviewer: > i dont understand how we will use 1.34 if it doesn't have downward API, where kubevirt requires downward API

The downward API is invoked through driver, you can have a kubernetes 1.34 cluster and a driver that supports downward API  (via 1.36 kubeletplugin) and it will still work.

Author: correct, but we don't plan to do it for network DRA, nor have this kind of driver,
moreover there are bugs related to DRA that were fixed on Kubevirt 1.8 and k8s only on 1.36
and some will be fixed only on Kubevirt 1.9
for example https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17490 (at least the 2nd commit is needed for this VEP, and the first needed for follow-up effort)
we don't want to support combination before that, especially not for alpha

moreover since it will not be tested, we don't support it

btw k8s-1.34 with the CRI we are using has a bug
https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirtci/pull/1637
so only 1.35 can potentially, but again, we don't check the whole matrix
we should focus on 1.36, and on what we test

A new network source field `ResourceClaim` is added to `NetworkSource`.
The field reuses the existing core `ClaimRequest` type (already used by GPUs and HostDevices):

```go
// Represents the source resource that will be connected to the VM.
// Only one of its members may be specified.
type NetworkSource struct {
	Pod           *PodNetwork                 `json:"pod,omitempty"`
	Multus        *MultusNetwork              `json:"multus,omitempty"`

> 	ResourceClaim *ClaimRequest               `json:"resourceClaim,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Added an alternative in a separate comment where this field is not required, PTAL: https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/185/changes#r3161593871

Author: answered there
this is the one that was decided to have broadly

### Validation

Webhook validations ensure:
1. Networks with `resourceClaim` source must map to interfaces using a DRA-compatible device binding.
2. Each network must reference a unique `claimName` + `requestName` combination.
   No two DRA entities (networks, hostDevices, or GPUs) can share the same tuple, because each interface/network pair must map to exactly one device allocation.
3. Reject mixing `multus` and `resourceClaim` network sources in the same VMI.

### Component Changes

**Virt-Controller:**
- Renders virt-launcher pod spec with resource claims from `vmi.spec.resourceClaims[]` referenced by `vmi.spec.networks[].resourceClaim`

**Virt-Launcher:**
- For DRA-backed network-device interfaces, virt-launcher resolves allocated device data from DRA metadata file content available in the pod
- Generates hostdev XML by:
  - Filtering VMI spec interfaces with compatible device bindings that reference networks with resourceClaim source
  - Matching claim/request identity from VMI network configuration to allocated metadata entries
  - Extracting the PCI address (and related attributes) from metadata entries
  - Generating standard libvirt hostdev XML

> - **Note:** If the ResourceClaim/ResourceClaimTemplate is allocating more than one device for the request, KubeVirt will consume the first device from the allocated devices

Reviewer: This note is different from the implementation, currently only one device is allowed, not the first device.

Author: correct as open issue, this is just in general the future plan
for now it isn't supported, not will be part of the code

if needed will create amend, but it is generally correct, once implemented
(wasn't planned to implement it as part of alpha)

- **Alpha1:**
  - Unit tests in-tree
  - No in-tree CI e2e gate
  - Validation is external/local, consistent with the current DRA alpha approach
  - Validation is executed with SR-IOV as the concrete network device type
- **Alpha follow-up:** Add non-migration e2e coverage and an in-tree lane as follow-up work.
- **Beta:** Extend coverage to migration scenarios (for `resourceClaimTemplateName`-backed claims only).

## Implementation History

- 2026-01-20: Initial design/VEP proposal for DRA-backed network device support

## Graduation Requirements

### Alpha

#### Alpha1

- Core API and integration changes behind `NetworkDevicesWithDRA` feature gate
- Unit tests
- No in-tree CI e2e gate (consistent with the current DRA alpha model)
- Validation with a concrete network-device DRA driver and provider setup (SR-IOV)

#### Alpha follow-up

- Non-migration DRA e2e tests added (we first need MAC support at least for some of those)
- In-tree e2e lane for those non-migration tests

### Beta

- Live migration support for DRA network devices, for `resourceClaimTemplateName`-backed claims
- Migration-specific e2e test coverage
- Evaluate user and driver author experience

### GA

> 

Reviewer 4: Parity with Multus source?

Author: Assuming you mean that we will have the same features multus gives
(it does beside migration, MAC and multi devices in the same VM due to kubevirt bug)

is it fine to amend the VEP on beta with this (i  prefer) ?
or to just add it now, since it will be a gating before we move to GA

        "type": "sriov",
        "vlan": 0,
        "spoofchk": "on",
        "trust": "on",
        "vlanQoS": 0,
        "logLevel": "info",
        "ipam": {
            "type": "host-local",
            "ranges": [
                [
                    {
                        "subnet": "10.0.1.0/24"
                    }
                ]
            ]
        }
    }
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: sriov-claim-template
spec:
  spec:
    devices:
      requests:
      - name: vf
        exactly:
          deviceClassName: sriovnetwork.k8snetworkplumbingwg.io
      config:
      - requests: ["vf"]
        opaque:
          driver: sriovnetwork.k8snetworkplumbingwg.io
          parameters:
            apiVersion: sriovnetwork.k8snetworkplumbingwg.io/v1alpha1
            kind: VfConfig
            netAttachDefName: sriov-nad
            driver: vfio-pci
            addVhostMount: true

---
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  name: vmi-sriov-dra
spec:
  domain:
    devices:
      interfaces:
      - name: sriov-net
        sriov: {}
  networks:
  - name: sriov-net
    resourceClaim:

>       claimName: sriov-network-claim

Reviewer: The proposed API requires users to connect a single DRA-backed network device across three separate parts of the VMI spec: spec.resourceClaims, spec.networks, and spec.domain.devices.interfaces. 

I’m concerned this about the ux of this API. 

The alternative option is as follows:
```
spec:
  domain:
    devices:
      interfaces:
      - name: primary
        masquerade: {}
      - name: sriov-net
        claimName: sriov-network-claim
        requestName: nic
        sriov: {}
  networks:
  - name: primary
    pod: {}
  resourceClaims:
  - name: sriov-network-claim
    resourceClaimTemplateName: sriov-claim-template
```
Was this considered? Why does it not work?

Author: alternatives like this were considered, and since this is not how we already have for network interfaces, which have interface + network, it was rejected

Reviewer: For full clarity, the two options with primary and dra sriov interface looks like this:

option 1: as suggested by the kep:
```
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  name: vmi-sriov-dra
spec:
  domain:
    devices:
      interfaces:
      - name: primary
        masquerade: {}
      - name: sriov-net
        sriov: {}
  networks:
  - name: primary
    pod: {}
  - name: sriov-net
    claimName: sriov-network-claim
    requestName: nic
  resourceClaims:
  - name: sriov-network-claim
    resourceClaimTemplateName: sriov-claim-template
```

Option 2:
```
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  name: vmi-sriov-dra
spec:
  domain:
    devices:
      interfaces:
      - name: primary
        masquerade: {}
      - name: sriov-net
        claimName: sriov-network-claim
        requestName: nic
        sriov: {}
  networks:
  - name: primary
    pod: {}
  resourceClaims:
  - name: sriov-network-claim
    resourceClaimTemplateName: sriov-claim-template
```

Reviewer 2: @oshoval, its worth adding to the document with reasoning why it was rejected.

Author: added to my Q

meanwhile i will sumup here

it was considered back and forth several times,
and since it was decided to adhere and respect the current interface + network tuple API, as bundle and logic separation, and due to the fact the `spec.resourceClaims` already exists, 
this is the API that was chosen

the other alternatives at least break one of those,
we want to keep network devices API structure consistent

given those, and since network is the one the specify the source, the most natural way is the one that was selecteted

## Open Issues

1. **MAC assignment for DRA-backed network interfaces (post-Alpha1):**
   - Keep MAC support as follow-up scope rather than Alpha1 core.
   - Define the final propagation mechanism from `spec.domain.devices.interfaces[].macAddress`.
   - Define ownership of MAC propagation metadata generation (for example, whether Virt-Controller writes it, or an alternative component/path does).
   - If using annotation-based propagation, standardize the `kubevirt.io/dra-networks` payload shape with `claimName` / `requestName` / `mac`. (prefix subject to change, so it will be generic and not kubevirt specific)
     example:
     `kubevirt.io/dra-networks: '[{"claimName":"sriov-network-claim","requestName":"vf","mac":"de:ad:00:00:be:ef"}]'`
   - Define driver-side behavior for consuming MAC requests and applying them to the target network device.
   - Define the minimum MAC support needed to unblock non-migration, MAC based, DRA e2e tests.
2. **Multiple network devices mapped to the same `ResourceClaim` / `ResourceClaimTemplate`:**
   - Current scope focuses on one DRA network device per VM when devices map to the same RC/RCT.

>    - After [kubevirt/kubevirt#16769](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/issues/16769) is merged, support can be extended to multiple devices that reference the same RC/RCT with different `requestName` values.

Author: fixed by https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17490

   - User impact: consumers that may rely on `infoSource` containing `multus` to identify interface origin will not get that signal for DRA-backed interfaces.
   - Add support for the reciprocal alternative (for example, DRA-tap based flow) according to user and product needs.
4. **`ResourceClaimTemplate` requests with `count > 1` are not supported:**
   - Current scope supports one allocated device per request for DRA-backed network interfaces.
5. **Multiple matched devices are not supported:**
   - When multiple devices match for the same request, KubeVirt fails with an error.
   - Reference: [kubevirt/kubevirt#17028 (diff)](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17028/files#diff-0027cc61eb4150ec3e72d9bb6038bc08f5448b06d0211010de6995883126ca1aR128)
6. **Mixed device types in the same `ResourceClaimTemplate` are not yet validated:**
   - A `ResourceClaimTemplate` that includes mixed device types (for example, GPU and SR-IOV), with a VM that requests both, is expected to be supported.
   - This scenario was not validated in the current scope and must be validated in follow-up work.

>    - This follow-up is important because mixed-type claims are a key DRA capability.

Author: Not part of the VEP, but:

with https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17490 (Fixing multi device rendering)
and https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/17661 (VEP implementation)

created 2 SR-IOV policies, where each reference a subset of the VFs,
created RCT that is connected to those 2 policies via different device classes.

now if we request 2 SR-IOV interfaces each from a different group,
we can see that each is taken from the group it should,
this simulates "different" drivers good enough imo, at least to some extend,
since whats matter mostly is the <claimName,requestName> key
Kubevirt searches for `*-metadata.json` hence it is driver agnostic,
and if there is more than one match available for the tuple, it asserts
(see `readMetadataFromDir`).

```
NAMESPACE	CLAIM	REQUEST	DEVICE	POOL	GROUP
default	virt-launcher-testvmi-l7x4z-sriov-hwdps	vf1	0000-65-02-0	sriov-worker	group-a
default	virt-launcher-testvmi-l7x4z-sriov-hwdps	vf2	0000-65-02-2	sriov-worker	group-b
```

# VEP #183: Network Device DRA Support

## VEP Status Metadata

### Target releases

- This VEP targets alpha for version: v1.9

### Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [x] (R) Enhancement issue created, which links to VEP dir in [kubevirt/enhancements] (not the initial VEP PR)
- [x] (R) Alpha target version is explicitly mentioned and approved

## Overview

This proposal adds support for [DRA (Dynamic Resource Allocation)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/) provisioned network devices in KubeVirt.

> It extends the existing KubeVirt networks API with a new `ResourceClaimNetworkSource` type, allowing network devices to be allocated via DRA while maintaining compatibility with existing Multus-based integrations.

Reviewer 2: nit: The overview mentions `ResourceClaimNetworkSource` by name, consider keeping the concrete type for the design section and using something more general here:
```suggestion
It extends the existing KubeVirt networks API with a new network source type for DRA-backed devices, allowing network devices to be allocated via DRA while maintaining compatibility with existing Multus-based integrations.
```

Author: done

This VEP builds upon the core DRA infrastructure defined in VEP #10 ([kubevirt/enhancements/pull/11](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/11)) to add support for network devices.
It strives to define a generic network-device model, while using SR-IOV as the concrete Alpha example.

## Motivation

> DRA adoption for network devices is important for KubeVirt not only for driver authors, but also for users and administrators. Compared to the current device-plugin + Multus flow, DRA provides a Kubernetes-native, claim-based model that supports richer constraints, enables earlier scheduling decisions based on device requirements, and standardizes device lifecycle management via built-in APIs.

Reviewer 2: The motivation jumps straight into why DRA is better without first stating what's limiting about the current approach. A sentence or two grounding the reader would help, for example:

> Today, consuming network devices in KubeVirt relies on the device-plugin + Multus flow. Device plugins expose devices as opaque integer counts, so the scheduler has no visibility into device topology, NUMA affinity, or cross-device constraints - placement decisions are made without understanding what the workload actually needs.

Author: done

- **Structured metadata path in KubeVirt:** KubeVirt consumes allocated device attributes from the DRA metadata/downward-API path (aligned with VEP #10), which is more robust and extensible than relying on ad-hoc per-plugin conventions.

## Goals

- Enable KubeVirt VMs to consume network devices via DRA, using externally supplied DRA drivers
- Define a generic integration model for DRA-backed network devices

## Non Goals

- Replace existing Multus-based network integrations (remain fully supported)
- Deploy/manage external DRA network drivers (provided externally)
- Support coexistence of DRA and legacy device-plugin modes for the same device type in the same cluster
- Live migration of VMs with DRA network devices in Alpha (targeted for Beta)
- Live migration for VMs using direct `spec.resourceClaims[].resourceClaimName` claims (without `resourceClaimTemplateName`)
  - Reasoning: a direct `ResourceClaim` is bound to a node after allocation, while migration requires creating a target virt-launcher pod on a different node.

>     That target pod needs a different claim/allocation on the destination node, which is achieved via `ResourceClaimTemplate`.

Reviewer 2: Consider combining these two:
```suggestion
- Live migration of VMs with DRA network devices:
  - Not supported in Alpha (targeted for Beta, using `resourceClaimTemplate`-backed claims only)
  - Permanently unsupported when using `resourceClaim`-backed claims  direct, because a direct ResourceClaim is bound to a node after allocation, while migration requires a separate allocation on the destination node
```

Author: done

- VM network interface hot-plug / hot-plug add for DRA network devices

> 

Reviewer 2: Consider adding the MAC address setting as there is no native K8s API for doing so.

Author: done

- As an admin, I want to control network device allocation through the DRA APIs so that I can define allocation policies without modifying KubeVirt configuration.

## Repos

kubevirt/kubevirt

## Design

This design introduces a new feature gate: `NetworkDevicesWithDRA`.
All the API changes will be gated behind this feature gate so as not to break existing functionality.

### End-to-End Flow

#### Admin flow (one-time setup)

1. Enable and configure the target DRA network-device environment in the cluster:
   - Deploy/configure the external DRA driver for the target network device type.
   - Create / Ensure a `DeviceClass` exists that selects the target network devices managed by that DRA driver.
2. Enable the KubeVirt `NetworkDevicesWithDRA` feature gate.

#### User flow (per VM)

1. Create claim objects users will consume: one or more `ResourceClaimTemplate` objects (or `ResourceClaim` objects) with device requests that reference the selected network-device `DeviceClass` via `deviceClassName`.
2. Define a VMI interface using a compatible binding and a matching network using `resourceClaim` source.

> 3. Reference the claim and request via `network.resourceClaim.claimName` and `network.resourceClaim.requestName`.

Reviewer 2: These steps overlap, consider merging them:
```suggestion
2. Define a VMI interface with a compatible binding and a matching network with resourceClaim source, referencing the claim and request via `network.resourceClaim.claimName` and `network.resourceClaim.requestName`.
```

Additionally, shouldn't the step about `vmi.spec.resourceClaims[]` come first?

Author: done both

> 4. Add a matching entry in `vmi.spec.resourceClaims[]` for `network.resourceClaim.claimName` (using either an admin-provided `ResourceClaim` or a `ResourceClaimTemplate`).

Reviewer 2: Step 1 describes the user creating the claims, but step 4 says "admin-provided ResourceClaim", and the responsibility boundary assigns provisioning to the user.

Also, ResourceClaimTemplate is reusable across VMs, so creating it isn't really a "per VM" step - it's closer to one-time setup that blurs into the admin flow.

Author: we concluded that user is creating the RCT, not admin, as it is namespaced obj,
but i will refactor it so it will be seen as reusable / and fix the admin provided sentence

5. Create the VMI.

#### Responsibility boundary

- **Admin owns:**
  - driver/operator deployment
  - `DeviceClass` definitions
- **User owns:**
  - provisioning/policy of `ResourceClaim`/`ResourceClaimTemplate` objects
  - VMI interface/network wiring
  - selecting claim/request references from provisioned `ResourceClaim`/`ResourceClaimTemplate` objects

### External Dependencies

> - The DRA driver for the selected network-device type is external to KubeVirt and is not delivered by this VEP.

Reviewer 2: What does it mean "the selected network-device"?
This sounds like a non-goal - provide KubeVirt compatible DRA drivers.

Author: it is just part of the generalization we done, supporting DRA network, so network-device here, as appears all over, is the general DRA network device,
and SR-IOV is the specific one, as we agreed

in other words it means the network driver you need in general

changing to
- A DRA driver for the target network-device type is an external dependency; it is selected and deployed outside KubeVirt, and is not delivered by this VEP.

> - Provider and environment enablement for end-to-end execution is handled outside KubeVirt core and phased separately from Alpha1 core deliverables.

Reviewer 2: This also sounds like a non-goal.

Author: moving to non goal as

- In-tree `kubevirtci` provider support for DRA network device e2e in Alpha1 (targeted for Alpha follow-up)
- In-tree CI e2e gating in Alpha1 (targeted for Alpha follow-up)

- Driver capability requirements (for network-device DRA drivers):
  - Must support publishing device attributes through the Kubernetes DRA metadata/Downward API flow, including support for:
    - `resource.kubernetes.io/pciBusID` (the device PCI address).
    > **Note:** This capability is Alpha in Kubernetes v1.36 and requires Kubernetes >= v1.36 (see [kubernetes/enhancements#5304](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5304)).

### API Changes

A new network source type `ResourceClaimNetworkSource` is added to the existing `NetworkSource` type:

```go
// Represents the source resource that will be connected to the VM.
// Only one of its members may be specified.
type NetworkSource struct {
	Pod           *PodNetwork                 `json:"pod,omitempty"`
	Multus        *MultusNetwork              `json:"multus,omitempty"`
	ResourceClaim *ResourceClaimNetworkSource `json:"resourceClaim,omitempty"`
}

// ResourceClaimNetworkSource represents a network resource requested

> // via a Kubernetes ResourceClaim.

Reviewer 2: What about ResourceClaimTemplate?

Author: done

type ResourceClaimNetworkSource struct {
	// ClaimName references the name of an entry in the
	// VMI's spec.resourceClaims[] array.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	ClaimName string `json:"claimName"`

	// RequestName specifies which request from the
	// ResourceClaim.spec.devices.requests array this network
	// source corresponds to.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	RequestName string `json:"requestName"`
}
```

> The VMI must also include the resource claim in `spec.resourceClaims[]` (consistent with GPU and HostDevice DRA usage).

Reviewer 2: I think that this should be mentioned earlier in the flow - the user needs the spec.resourceClaims[] entry before referencing it from a network. Also, the ResourceClaimNetworkSource API definition above should clarify that claimName refers to an entry in spec.resourceClaims[], not directly to a ResourceClaim CR in the namespace.

Author: dropping this,
the `ResourceClaimNetworkSource` API and updated "#### User flow (claim setup + per-VM attach)"
will cover those, according the previous comments above

> ### Device Allocation Resolution

Reviewer 2: This section seems relevant to virt-launcher specifically - consider moving it under the Component Changes / Virt-Launcher subsection, or dropping it entirely since the virt-launcher description already covers how device attributes are resolved from DRA metadata.

Author: done

The DRA network data path uses the pod-local DRA metadata file (downward API style) as the source of truth for allocated device attributes (for example, PCI address), consistent with existing DRA device handling.

### Network Device Integration

When a network interface has a compatible device binding and references a network with `resourceClaim` source:

1. The network admitter validates that exactly one network source type (pod, multus, or resourceClaim) is specified
2. Virt-controller adds the resource claim to the virt-launcher pod spec via `WithNetworksDRA()` render option
3. The pod receives DRA allocation metadata through the Kubernetes DRA metadata-file mechanism
4. Virt-launcher resolves the claim/request to device attributes from that metadata and generates the appropriate libvirt hostdev XML

This approach keeps a clean separation: DRA handles provisioning and allocation metadata publication, while KubeVirt networks API handles VM network configuration.

### Validation

Webhook validations ensure:

> 1. Networks with `resourceClaim` source have corresponding compatible device-binding interfaces.

Reviewer 2: Could you please clarify what does this mean?

Author: That if you used the new network NetworkSource field `ResourceClaim`
then the associated interface of that network need a DRA supported interface binding type,
only tested and supported type is "sriov: {}"

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarification. Could you please add this to the text? Readers won't have the comment thread for context.

Author: done

2. Each network must reference a unique `claimName` + `requestName` combination.
   No two DRA entities (networks, hostDevices, or GPUs) can share the same tuple, because each interface/network pair must map to exactly one device allocation.

> 3. No mixing of legacy and DRA allocation modes for the same network device type in the same VMI.

Reviewer 2: What does it mean?
Is it allowed to have a primary pod network and a secondary DRA-backed network?

Author: meant that webhook will enforce no mixing of sriov multus and sriov DRA in the same VMI,
(even that we block it cluster wide for now, we also block it VMI scoped in webhook)
will refactor the line

Reviewer 2: Can we simplify the logic to only block the combination of Multus and DRA, without inspecting the bindings? Since this VEP is intended to be generic rather than SR-IOV specific, a broader restriction seems more appropriate.

Author: yes will change to
Reject mixing `multus` and `resourceClaim` network sources in the same VMI.

Author: thought about it again, its wrong to not inspect the binding imo
i.e we can have secondary interface which isn't sriov, and DRA SR-IOV, and shouldn't block it

Reviewer 2: > thought about it again, its wrong to not inspect the binding imo i.e we can have secondary interface which isn't sriov, and DRA SR-IOV, and shouldn't block it

Today, one can have an interface with bridge binding, connected to a NAD using SR-IOV CNI.
We don't have logic to verify the binding works with the underlying network.

Author: Do we know whether this example is actually used by customers in practice?
It may be worth weighting known usage patterns so we can strike the best balance between logical consistency and the scenarios that are most widely used.

if we block every combination of DRA and multus, it means also multus as default network will be blocked.
moreover we can check up to what VM shows, not the NAD, i.e the interface binding type.

for now will do you as you suggest, and we can discuss deeper on the PR imho

Reviewer 2: > Do we know whether this example is actually used by customers in practice? It may be worth weighting known usage patterns so we can strike the best balance between logical consistency and the scenarios that are most widely used.

No, as this VEP introduces DRA usage in KubeVirt, so there is no field experience to draw from.

> if we block every combination of DRA and multus, it means also multus as default network will be blocked. 

Default multus network is a niche feature. From my perspective we don't have to support it for Alpha. We can revisit when there's actual user demand.

> moreover we can check up to what VM shows, not the NAD, i.e the interface binding type.
> 
> for now will do you as you suggest, and we can discuss deeper on the PR imho

Thanks.

### Component Changes

**Virt-Controller:**

> - Renders virt-launcher pod spec with resource claims from `vmi.spec.resourceClaims[]` referenced by `vmi.spec.networks[].resourceClaim`

Reviewer 2: This is a repetition of info introduced by "Network Device Integration" without adding more details.
Consider dropping it or the other section.

Author: `### Network Device Integration` is high level for all the flow changes,
while this one is per Kubevirt core actor (i.e virt-controller / virt-launcher), i prefer to keep both please

> 

Reviewer 2: Are there any changes expected in virt-handler?
Does virt-handler need to mark VMs using DRA-network as non-migratable in Alpha?

Author: no changes i know of for virt-handler

for now there is no plan to mark as such,
same applies as Edy suggested for ones that use RC,
a user can try and it will fail

Reviewer 2: Works for me for Alpha. Let's revisit for Beta, as an early signal would be a better user experience IMO.

**Virt-Launcher:**
- For DRA-backed network-device interfaces, virt-launcher resolves allocated device data from DRA metadata file content available in the pod

> - The `CreateDRAHostDevices()` function generates hostdev XML by:

Reviewer 2: Please avoid using function names.

Author: done

  - Filtering VMI spec interfaces with compatible device bindings that reference networks with resourceClaim source
  - Matching claim/request identity from VMI network configuration to allocated metadata entries
  - Extracting the PCI address (and related attributes) from metadata entries
  - Generating standard libvirt hostdev XML

- **Note:** If the ResourceClaim/ResourceClaimTemplate is allocating more than one device for the request, KubeVirt will consume the first device from the allocated devices

## Scalability

This integration follows the existing DRA scalability model used for other device types (for example, GPUs and HostDevices). See [VEP #10](../../sig-compute/10-dra-devices/vep.md#scalability) for details.

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

> - Changes are upgrade compatible

Reviewer 2: Please provide reasoning for this statement.

Author: done
(we just need to support elementary upgrade on alpha, where FG is disabled)

- Rollback works as long as feature gate is disabled
- If the feature is enabled, VMIs using DRA network devices must be deleted and feature gate disabled before attempting rollback

## Functional Testing Approach

> - **Alpha1:** Unit tests in-tree; no in-tree CI e2e gate. Validation is external/local, consistent with the current DRA alpha approach. Note: validation is executed with SR-IOV as the concrete network device type.

Reviewer 2: nit: Please break it into several lines.

Author: done

- **Alpha follow-up:** Add non-migration e2e coverage and an in-tree lane as follow-up work.

> - **Beta:** Extend coverage to migration scenarios based on Downward API metadata-file flows (for `resourceClaimTemplateName`-backed claims only).

Reviewer 2: Why mention the Downward API metadata-file flow here? This is a testing section - it could just say "Extend coverage to migration scenarios (for resourceClaimTemplateName-backed claims only)" without coupling the test plan to a specific implementation mechanism.

Author: done

## Implementation History

- 2026-01-20: Initial design/VEP proposal for DRA-backed network device support

## Graduation Requirements

### Alpha

#### Alpha1

- Core API and integration changes behind `NetworkDevicesWithDRA` feature gate
- Unit tests
- No in-tree CI e2e gate (consistent with the current DRA alpha model)
- Validation with a concrete network-device DRA driver and provider setup (SR-IOV)

#### Alpha follow-up

- Non-migration DRA e2e tests added (we first need MAC support at least for some of those)
- In-tree e2e lane for those non-migration tests

### Beta

> - Live migration support for DRA network devices via Downward API metadata files, for `resourceClaimTemplateName`-backed claims

Reviewer 2: Same question: Why do we need to mention the downward API here?

Author: amended

- Migration-specific e2e test coverage
- Evaluate user and driver author experience

### GA

> - Support Scalable Functions network devices.

Reviewer 2: What are Scalable Functions network devices?

Author: @SchSeba asked to add it,
note we can't commit for it for GA, so maybe better to remove it

“Scalable Functions network devices” usually means NIC subfunctions (SFs) 
from newer SmartNIC/DPUs (for example mlx5 SFs), 
i.e. a newer virtualization model beyond classic SR-IOV VFs.

In plain terms:

They are virtual network functions/endpoints carved from a physical NIC.
Similar purpose to VFs (attachable virtual NICs), but often lighter/finer-grained and faster to provision.
They are typically managed through vendor tooling/driver APIs and can be exposed to Kubernetes via a DRA driver.

https://docs.nvidia.com/networking/display/bluefielddpuosv451/scalable%2Bfunctions

changing to
- Support additional DRA-managed network device types beyond the Alpha SR-IOV example.

(not a commitment, according priorities)

Reviewer 2: Thank you for the explenation.

- Live migration for direct `spec.resourceClaims[].resourceClaimName` claims remains unsupported by design.

> ## Concrete Example: SR-IOV (Alpha Scope)

Reviewer 2: Please mark it as an appendix.

Author: done

This VEP is intentionally generic, and uses SR-IOV as a concrete Alpha example for driver behavior and end-to-end workflow.

> - In the Alpha example, networks map to interfaces that use `sriov` binding.

Reviewer 2: Since this is reflected from the provided manifests, consider dropping it.

Author: done

> **Important:** At this stage, traditional Multus-based SR-IOV (using `multus` network source) and DRA-based SR-IOV (using `resourceClaim` network source) are mutually exclusive at the cluster level (single mode per cluster). A single VMI must not mix both approaches. The existing Multus-based SR-IOV API remains fully supported and unchanged.

Reviewer 2: >  A single VMI must not mix both approaches. The existing Multus-based SR-IOV API remains fully supported and unchanged.

Isn't it reflected in the design - validation section?

Author: dropped

> ### API Example: VMI with DRA SR-IOV Network

Reviewer 2: Consider mentioning that this is expected to work with https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/dra-driver-sriov.

Author: done

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: Consider mentioning that NAD is now an implementation detail of the SR-IOV DRA driver.

Author: done

metadata:
  name: vmi-sriov-dra
spec:
  domain:
    devices:
      interfaces:
      - name: sriov-net
        sriov: {}
  networks:
  - name: sriov-net
    resourceClaim:
      claimName: sriov-network-claim
      requestName: vf
  resourceClaims:
  - name: sriov-network-claim
    resourceClaimTemplateName: sriov-claim-template
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: virt-launcher-vmi-sriov-dra
spec:
  containers:
  - name: compute
    image: virt-launcher
    resources:
      claims:
      - name: sriov-network-claim
        request: vf
  resourceClaims:
  - name: sriov-network-claim
    resourceClaimTemplateName: sriov-claim-template
status:
  resourceClaimStatuses:
  - name: sriov-network-claim
    resourceClaimName: virt-launcher-vmi-sriov-dra-sriov-network-claim-abc123
```

## References

- DRA: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/
- Example SR-IOV DRA driver: https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/dra-driver-sriov
- VEP #10 (DRA devices): /veps/sig-compute/10-dra-devices/vep.md
- Kubernetes DRA device information injection: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5606

## Open Issues

> 1. **MAC assignment for DRA-backed network interfaces (post-Alpha1):**

Author: Hi @SchSeba 
Can you please consider prioritizing having answer about the preferred MAC passing solution ?
We would need it for the e2e once we reach it,
meanwhile implemented the annotation way https://github.com/k8snetworkplumbingwg/dra-driver-sriov/pull/95

Thanks

# VEP #183: Network Device DRA Support

## VEP Status Metadata

### Target releases

- This VEP targets alpha for version: v1.9

### Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [x] (R) Enhancement issue created, which links to VEP dir in [kubevirt/enhancements] (not the initial VEP PR)
- [x] (R) Alpha target version is explicitly mentioned and approved

> ## Overview

Reviewer 2: The Kubernetes >= v1.36 requirement is currently located under External Dependencies. Since this is a hard prerequisite, consider mentioning it in the Overview so readers know upfront which clusters can use this feature.

Author: done

This proposal adds support for [DRA (Dynamic Resource Allocation)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/dynamic-resource-allocation/) provisioned network devices in KubeVirt.

> It extends the existing KubeVirt networks API with a new network source type for DRA-backed devices, allowing network devices to be allocated via DRA without removing the existing device-plugin + Multus-based SR-IOV approach, which remains supported separately.

Reviewer 2: Since SR-IOV is just an example, consider dropping SR-IOV to make the text more generic:

```suggestion
It extends the existing KubeVirt networks API with a new network source type for DRA-backed devices, allowing network devices to be allocated via DRA without removing the existing device-plugin + Multus-based approach, which remains supported separately.
```

Author: well the problem is specific for SR-IOV here in Kubevirt, DP + CNI versus DRA
so it could be confusing to remove it, but anyhow will remove

Author: done

This VEP builds upon the core DRA infrastructure defined in VEP #10 ([kubevirt/enhancements/pull/11](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/11)) to add support for network devices.

> It strives to define a generic network-device model, while using SR-IOV as the concrete Alpha example.

Reviewer 2: Let's use more committed terminology - the VEP either defines a generic model or it doesn't.
```suggestion
It defines a generic network-device model, while using SR-IOV as the concrete Alpha example.
```

Author: done

DRA adoption for network devices is important for KubeVirt driver authors, users, and administrators. Compared to the existing flow, DRA provides a Kubernetes-native, claim-based model that supports richer constraints, enables earlier scheduling decisions based on device requirements, and standardizes device lifecycle management via built-in APIs.

Key advantages for users/admins:
- **Fine-grained and complex constraints:** DRA requests are expressed through `ResourceClaim`/`ResourceClaimTemplate` and `DeviceClass`, so users/admins can describe *what* they need (not only "one device"). This enables richer matching than a plain extended-resource count.
- **Scheduler-aware allocation flow:** Allocation is part of a Kubernetes-native claim flow before workload finalization, so placement decisions can account for device constraints earlier.
- **Standard, built-in Kubernetes API model:** DRA uses first-class Kubernetes APIs (`ResourceClaim`, `ResourceClaimTemplate`, `DeviceClass`) instead of plugin-specific side channels, improving portability, auditability, and ongoing operations.

> - **Structured metadata path in KubeVirt:** KubeVirt consumes allocated device attributes from the DRA metadata/downward-API path (aligned with VEP #10), which is more robust and extensible than relying on ad-hoc per-plugin conventions.

Reviewer 2: The first three bullets are generic DRA advantages that apply to any Kubernetes workload. This last one is the only KubeVirt-specific point, but it's framed as an internal mechanism rather than a user/admin advantage. Consider reframing it - e.g., how the standardized metadata contract reduces per-driver integration effort for admins and driver authors (or KubeVirt maintainers).

Author: done

        "ipam": {
            "type": "host-local",
            "ranges": [
                [
                    {
                        "subnet": "10.0.1.0/24"
                    }
                ]
            ]
        }
    }
---
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: sriov-claim-template
spec:
  spec:
    devices:
      requests:
      - name: vf
        exactly:
          deviceClassName: sriovnetwork.k8snetworkplumbingwg.io
      config:
      - requests: ["vf"]
        opaque:
          driver: sriovnetwork.k8snetworkplumbingwg.io
          parameters:
            apiVersion: sriovnetwork.k8snetworkplumbingwg.io/v1alpha1
            kind: VfConfig
            netAttachDefName: sriov-nad
            driver: vfio-pci
            addVhostMount: true

---
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachineInstance
metadata:
  name: vmi-sriov-dra
spec:
  domain:
    devices:
      interfaces:
      - name: sriov-net
        sriov: {}
  networks:
  - name: sriov-net
    resourceClaim:
      claimName: sriov-network-claim
      requestName: vf
  resourceClaims:
  - name: sriov-network-claim
    resourceClaimTemplateName: sriov-claim-template

> ---

Reviewer 2: It's worth mentioning that this pod spec is generated by virt-controller, so readers don't mistake it for something they need to write.

Author: done

   - Define ownership of MAC propagation metadata generation (for example, whether Virt-Controller writes it, or an alternative component/path does).
   - If using annotation-based propagation, standardize the `kubevirt.io/dra-networks` payload shape with `claimName` / `requestName` / `mac`. (prefix subject to change, so it will be generic and not kubevirt specific)
     example:
     `kubevirt.io/dra-networks: '[{"claimName":"sriov-network-claim","requestName":"vf","mac":"de:ad:00:00:be:ef"}]'`
   - Define driver-side behavior for consuming MAC requests and applying them to the target network device.
   - Define the minimum MAC support needed to unblock non-migration, MAC based, DRA e2e tests.
2. **Multiple network devices mapped to the same `ResourceClaim` / `ResourceClaimTemplate`:**
   - Current scope focuses on one DRA network device per VM when devices map to the same RC/RCT.
   - After [kubevirt/kubevirt#16769](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/issues/16769) is merged, support can be extended to multiple devices that reference the same RC/RCT with different `requestName` values.

> 3. **`infoSource: multus` is not supported for DRA-backed interfaces:**

Reviewer 2: Could you please clarify that this refers to vmi.status.interfaces[].infoSource? As written, readers unfamiliar with this field won't understand what DRA-backed interfaces are missing or what the user impact is.

Author: done
